New .NET MAUI BWA with shared UI article (#32390)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/hybrid/tutorials/maui-blazor-web-app.md

* For components rendered by the Blazor Web App for the web client, RCL component render modes are inherited from the global setting in the `App` component.

### Per-page/component rendering

The MAUI project is interactive by default, so no action is taken at the project level in the MAUI project other than calling `InteractiveRenderSettings.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes`.

Don't set an `@rendermode` directive attribute on the `HeadOutlet` and `Routes` components of the Blazor Web App's `App` component (`Components/App.razor`):

```razor
<HeadOutlet />

...

<Routes />
```

Apply render modes to individual components in the RCL.

The Razor class library (RCL) contains a global static `@using` directive (`@using static InteractiveRenderSettings`) to reference `InteractiveRenderSettings` class properties in the RCL's components. A component adopts a given render mode by assigning the render mode from `InteractiveRenderSettings` at the top of its component definition file (`.razor`) under its `@page` directive:

Interactive Server:

```razor
@rendermode InteractiveServer
```

Interactive Auto:

```razor
@rendermode InteractiveAuto
```

Interactive WebAssembly:

```razor

> @rendermode InteractiveWebAssembly

Reviewer: I think it's important to call out that if you want to share your UI with MAUI but also specify a per page InteractiveWebAssembly setting you'll want two RCLs, one with the wasm-only components and one with the rest. I show how to set that up in this branch: https://github.com/BethMassi/HybridSharedUI/tree/WebAsm-PPC

Also, anytime one selects the interactivity as Auto or WebAssembly then you also get a Web.Client project in your solution no matter the location.

Author: Cool ... it looks like after an edit pass that these are the only items that I'll need to address.

Author: It's a bit of a *Wowzers!* complicated setup.

It's going to take a bit more time to roll that into the mix. I now need to see if I need an entirely new section or if I can roll those aspects (WRT the 2nd RCL) into the existing *Per-component* section.

I still hope to have it drafted up today by this afternoon.

Author: I'm trying to do it in the *Per-component* subsection now.

I just pushed a commit. I need to step out OOF for a couple of hours, but I'll be back soon to work on it a bit more. You can look at the latest commit (or the whole DIFF) to see the latest updates that include where/how I addressed the Auto/WASM components and 2nd RCL setup.

The Blazor Web App sets a global interactive render mode normally in the `App` component (`Components/App.razor`). In the following example, the `HeadOutlet` and `Routes` components assign `InteractiveServer` from <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Web.RenderMode> via the Blazor Web App's `@using static Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Web.RenderMode` directive in the project's `_Imports` file:

```razor
<HeadOutlet @rendermode="InteractiveServer" />

...

<Routes @rendermode="InteractiveServer" />
```

At this point, no component in the RCL sets a render mode. A component's render mode is inherited from the global setting.

In summary:

* For components rendered by MAUI for the native client, RCL component render modes are `null`. The components are interactive by default.
* For components rendered by the Blazor Web App for the web client, RCL component render modes are inherited from the global setting in the `App` component.

### Per-page/component rendering

The MAUI project is interactive by default, so no action is taken at the project level in the MAUI project other than calling `InteractiveRenderSettings.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes`.

> When Auto or WebAssembly global interactivity is used, the solution also receives a `.Client` project:

Reviewer: I think this should be in the Global section.

* Add a project reference to the `.Client` project for the RCL.
* Add an `@using` statement to the `.Client` project's `_Imports.razor` file for the RCL: `@using MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`.

> * Create a second RCL to maintain the Auto or WebAssembly components (for example: `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Client`). Move the `Components` folder of the `.Client` project into the second RCL. Create a project reference in the first RCL (`MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`) to the second RCL that maintains the components (`MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Client`). Add `@using static InteractiveRenderSettings` to the second RCL's `_Imports.razor` file.

Reviewer: This is ONLY necessary for WebAssembly that also specifies Per page/component rendering. 

So basically it boils down to this -->
When Interactivity Location is Global and Interactivity Platform is Server then:

- There's just three projects (MAUI, Web, Shared)
- No need for the InteractiveRenderSettings class to intercept the render modes in the RCL

When Interactivity Location is Global and Interactivity Platform is Auto or WebAssembly then:

- There's four projects (MAUI, Web, Web.Client, Shared)
- No need for the InteractiveRenderSettings class to intercept the render modes in the RCL

When Interactivity Location is Per page/component and Interactivity Platform is Server then:

- There's just three projects (MAUI, Web, Shared)
- You do need the InteractiveRenderSettings class to intercept the render modes in the RCL and set them to Null in the MauiProgram.cs

When Interactivity Location is Per page/component and Interactivity Platform is Auto then:

- There's four projects (MAUI, Web, Web.Client, Shared)
- You do need the InteractiveRenderSettings class to intercept the render modes in the RCL and set them to Null in the MauiProgram.cs

When Interactivity Location is Per page/component and Interactivity Platform is WebAssembly then:

- There's FIVE projects (MAUI, Web, Web.Client, Shared, Shared.Client)
- The Shared.Client contains all the WebAssembly rendered components and is referenced by the Web.Client (and the Shared RCL)
- You do need the InteractiveRenderSettings class to intercept the render modes in the RCL and set them to Null in the MauiProgram.cs

Author: I see ... I'll work on this tomorrow morning.

Use the guidance in one of the following subsections that matches your app's specifications for applying Blazor [render modes](xref:blazor/components/render-modes) for a given interactivity location in the Blazor Web App but ignore the render mode assignments in the MAUI project.

Render mode and interactivity specification subsections:

* [Global Server interactivity](#global-server-interactivity)
* [Global Auto or WebAssembly interactivity](#global-auto-or-webassembly-interactivity)
* [Per-page/component Server interactivity](#per-pagecomponent-server-interactivity)
* [Per-page/component Auto interactivity](#per-pagecomponent-auto-interactivity)
* [Per-page/component WebAssembly interactivity](#per-pagecomponent-webassembly-interactivity)

### Global Server interactivity

* Interactive render mode: **Server**
* Interactivity location: **Global**
* Solution projects
  * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`)
  * Blazor Web App (`MauiBlazorWeb.Web`)
  * RCL (`MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`): Contains the shared Razor components without setting render modes in each component.

Project references:

* The MAUI and Blazor Web App each have a project reference to the `.Shared` RCL.

> * Blazor Web Apps have project references to the `.Web.Client` and `.Shared.Client` projects (if present).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Blazor Web App has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` project.
```

Reviewer: Server - Global doesn't have a Web.Client or Shared.Client project.

> * The `.Web.Client` has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL (if present). The `.Shared` RCL has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL (if present).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Server - Global doesn't need this.

### Global Auto or WebAssembly interactivity

* Interactive render mode: **Auto** or **WebAssembly**
* Interactivity location: **Global**
* Solution projects
  * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`)
  * Blazor Web App
    * Server project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web`
    * Client project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web.Client`
  * RCL (`MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`): Contains the shared Razor components without setting render modes in each component.

Project references:

* The MAUI and Blazor Web App each have a project reference to the `.Shared` RCL.

> * Blazor Web Apps have project references to the `.Web.Client` and `.Shared.Client` projects (if present).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Blazor Web Apps have project references to the `.Web.Client` and `.Shared.Client` projects.
```

> * The `.Web.Client` has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL (if present). The `.Shared` RCL has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL (if present).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Per-page/component Server interactivity

* Interactive render mode: **Server**
* Interactivity location: **Per-page/component**
* Solution projects

>   * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`): Doesn't set an `@rendermode` directive attribute on the `HeadOutlet` and `Routes` components of the `App` component (`Components/App.razor`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`): Calls the `InteractiveRenderSettings.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes` in the MauiProgram.cs 
```

>   * Blazor Web App (`MauiBlazorWeb.Web`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Blazor Web App (`MauiBlazorWeb.Web`): Doesn't set an `@rendermode` directive attribute on the `HeadOutlet` and `Routes` components of the `App` component (`Components/App.razor`).
```

  * RCL (`MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`): Contains the shared Razor components that set the `InteractiveServer` render mode in each component.

The MAUI and Blazor Web App each have a project reference to the `.Shared` RCL.

> Add the following `InteractiveRenderSettings` class is added to the RCL. The class properties are used to set component render modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following `InteractiveRenderSettings` class to the RCL. The class properties are used to set component render modes.
```

```csharp 
InteractiveRenderSettings.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes();
```

In the RCL's `_Imports.razor` file, add the following global static `@using` directive to make the properties of the class available to components:

```razor
@using static InteractiveRenderSettings
```

> [!NOTE]
> The assignment of render modes via the RCL's `InteractiveRenderSettings` class properties differs from a typical standalone Blazor Web App. In a Blazor Web App, the render modes are normally provided by <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Web.RenderMode> via the `@using static Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Web.RenderMode` statement in the Blazor Web App's `_Import` file.

### Per-page/component WebAssembly interactivity

* Interactive render mode: **WebAssembly**
* Interactivity location: **Per-page/component**
* Solution projects
  * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`)
  * Blazor Web App
    * Server project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web`: Doesn't set an `@rendermode` directive attribute on the `HeadOutlet` and `Routes` components of the `App` component (`Components/App.razor`).
    * Client project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web.Client`: Has a project reference to 
  * RCLs
    * `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`

>     * `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Client`: Contains the shared Razor components that set the `InteractiveWebAssembly` render mode in each component.

Reviewer: Maybe we should explain why they are separated? It's because you only want to download the components that are needed to run on WebAssembly. The components that run on Server stay on the server.

Project references:

> * The MAUI and Blazor Web App each have project references to the `.Shared` and `.Shared.Client` RCLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The MAUI and Blazor Web App each have project references to the `.Shared` RCL.
```

Reviewer: The Shared RCL has a reference to Shared.Client so you only need to reference Shared from the Server and MAUI projects.

* The Blazor Web App has a project reference to the `.Web.Client` project.
* The `.Web.Client` has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL. The `.Shared` RCL has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL.

Add the following `InteractiveRenderSettings` class is added to the RCL. The class properties are used to set component render modes.

The MAUI project is interactive by default, so no action is taken at the project level in the MAUI project other than calling `InteractiveRenderSettings.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes`.

For the Blazor Web App on the web client, the property values are assigned from <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Web.RenderMode>. When the components are loaded into a <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.WebView.Maui.BlazorWebView> for the MAUI project's native client, the render modes are unassigned (`null`) because the MAUI project explicitly sets the render mode properties to `null` when `ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes` is called.

> `InteractiveRenderSettings.cs`:

Reviewer: This class also needed in the Shared.Client. And it's slightly different in the Shared RCL. In that one it also calls Shared.Client.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes(). See: https://github.com/BethMassi/HybridSharedUI/blob/WebAsm-PPC/MyApp.Shared/InteractiveRenderSettings.cs

`Services/FormFactor.cs` (MAUI project):
 
:::code language="csharp" source="~/../blazor-samples/8.0/MauiBlazorWeb/MauiBlazorWeb.Maui/Services/FormFactor.cs":::

Use dependency injection to obtain the implementations of these services.

In the MAUI project, open the `MauiProgram.cs` file and add the following `using` statements to the top of the file:

```csharp
using MauiBlazorWeb.Maui.Services;
using MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Interfaces;
```

Immediately before the call to `builder.Build()`, add the following code to add device-specific services used by the RCL:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddSingleton<IFormFactor, FormFactor>();
```

In the Blazor Web App, open the `Program` file and add the following `using` statements to the top of the file:

```csharp
using MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Interfaces;
using MauiBlazorWeb.Web.Services;  
```

Immediately before the call to `builder.Build()`, add the following code to add device-specific services used by the RCL:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddScoped<IFormFactor, FormFactor>();
```

> 

Reviewer: Should we also mention that if you are also targeting WebAssembly (you have a Web.Client project) you will also need to provide an implementation here as well?

```razor
@using MauiBlazorWeb.Shared
@using MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Components
```

In the root of the RCL project, delete the following files:

* `Component1.razor`
* `ExampleJsInterop.cs`

In the RCL, open the `Components/Routes.razor` file and change `MauiProgram` to `Routes`:

```diff
- <Router AppAssembly="@typeof(MauiProgram).Assembly">
+ <Router AppAssembly="@typeof(Routes).Assembly">
```

Open the `MainPage.xaml` file in the MAUI project. Add an `xmlns:shared` reference to the RCL in the <xref:Microsoft.Maui.Controls.ContentPage> attributes. In the following example, the RCL's namespace is `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`. Set the correct value for both the `clr-namespace` and the `assembly`:

```xml
xmlns:shared="clr-namespace:MauiBlazorWeb.Shared;assembly=MauiBlazorWeb.Shared"
```

Also in the `MainPage.xaml` file, update the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.WebView.Maui.BlazorWebView> root component <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.WebView.Maui.RootComponent.ComponentType> from `local` to `shared`:

```diff

> - <RootComponent Selector="#app" ComponentType="{x:Type local:Routes}" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <RootComponent Selector="#app" ComponentType="{x:Type local:Components.Routes}" />
```

> + <RootComponent Selector="#app" ComponentType="{x:Type shared:Routes}" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ <RootComponent Selector="#app" ComponentType="{x:Type shared:Components.Routes}" />
```

### Per-page/component WebAssembly interactivity

* Interactive render mode: **WebAssembly**
* Interactivity location: **Per-page/component**
* Solution projects
  * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`)
  * Blazor Web App
    * Server project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web`: Doesn't set an `@rendermode` directive attribute on the `HeadOutlet` and `Routes` components of the `App` component (`Components/App.razor`).
    * Client project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web.Client`
  * RCLs
    * `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`
    * `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Client`: Contains the shared Razor components that set the `InteractiveWebAssembly` render mode in each component. The `.Shared.Client` RCL is maintained separately from the `.Shared` RCL because the app should maintain the components that are required to run on WebAssembly separately from the components that run on server and that stay on the server.

Project references:

* `MauiBlazorWeb.Maui` and `MauiBlazorWeb.Web` have project references to `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`.
* `MauiBlazorWeb.Web` has a project reference to `MauiBlazorWeb.Web.Client`.
* `MauiBlazorWeb.Web.Client` and `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared` have a project reference to `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Client`.

> 

Reviewer: One additional step I forgot here is that you'll need to hook up the additional assembly MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Client in the MauiBlazorWeb.Shared project's Routes.razor and the MauiBlazorWeb.Web project's Program.cs.

Reviewer: Add the following call to `AdditionalAssemblies` in the `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared` `Routes.razor` file:
```csharp
<Router AppAssembly="@typeof(Routes).Assembly" 
        AdditionalAssemblies="new [] { typeof(MyApp.Shared.Client._Imports).Assembly}">
    <Found Context="routeData">
        <RouteView RouteData="@routeData" DefaultLayout="@typeof(Components.Layout.MainLayout)" />
        <FocusOnNavigate RouteData="@routeData" Selector="h1" />
    </Found>
</Router>
```
Add the following call to `AdditionalAssemblies` in the `MauiBlazorWeb.Web` `Program.cs` file:
```csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()    
    .AddInteractiveWebAssemblyRenderMode()
    .AddAdditionalAssemblies(typeof(MyApp.Shared._Imports).Assembly)
    .AddAdditionalAssemblies(typeof(MyApp.Shared.Client._Imports).Assembly); 
```

`InteractiveRenderSettings.cs`:

:::code language="csharp" source="~/../blazor-samples/8.0/MauiBlazorWeb/MauiBlazorWeb.Shared/InteractiveRenderSettings.cs":::

In `MauiProgram.CreateMauiApp` of `MauiProgram.cs`, call `ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes`:

```csharp 
InteractiveRenderSettings.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes();
```

In the RCL's `_Imports.razor` file, add the following global static `@using` directive to make the properties of the class available to components:

```razor
@using static InteractiveRenderSettings
```

> [!NOTE]
> The assignment of render modes via the RCL's `InteractiveRenderSettings` class properties differs from a typical standalone Blazor Web App. In a Blazor Web App, the render modes are normally provided by <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Web.RenderMode> via the `@using static Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Web.RenderMode` statement in the Blazor Web App's `_Import` file.

### Per-page/component Auto interactivity

* Interactive render mode: **Auto**
* Interactivity location: **Per-page/component**
* Solution projects

>   * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`): Calls `InteractiveRenderSettings.ConfigureBlazorHybridRenderModes` in `MauiProgram.cs`. 
```

Reviewer: Added for consistency with the previous section. I'd either leave it out on both or put the comment on both since they need to be the same.

### Per-page/component WebAssembly interactivity

* Interactive render mode: **WebAssembly**
* Interactivity location: **Per-page/component**
* Solution projects
  * MAUI (`MauiBlazorWeb.Maui`)
  * Blazor Web App
    * Server project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web`: Doesn't set an `@rendermode` directive attribute on the `HeadOutlet` and `Routes` components of the `App` component (`Components/App.razor`).
    * Client project: `MauiBlazorWeb.Web.Client` 
  * RCLs
    * `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared`
    * `MauiBlazorWeb.Shared.Client`: Contains the shared Razor components that set the `InteractiveWebAssembly` render mode in each component. The `.Shared.Client` RCL is maintained separately from the `.Shared` RCL because the app should maintain the components that are required to run on WebAssembly separately from the components that run on server and that stay on the server.

Project references:

> * The MAUI and Blazor Web App each have project references to the `.Shared` RCL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The MAUI and Blazor Web server project each have project references to the `.Shared` RCL.
```

> * The Blazor Web App has a project reference to the `.Web.Client` project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Blazor Web server project has a project reference to the `.Web.Client` project.
```

> * The `.Web.Client` has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL. The `.Shared` RCL has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `.Web.Client` has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL. 
* The `.Shared` RCL has a project reference to the `.Shared.Client` RCL.
```
